---
title: "iOS 7: The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly"
date: 2013-09-19 15:45
layout: post
category: reviews
tags: reviews products
description: "The good and the bad of iOS 7, as well as my thoughts on Apple's 
future direction as a company."
excerpt: "Just under a year from the controversial release of iOS 6, the company that essentially invented the modern smartphone is back again with an operating system it hopes will leave the complaints of the past behind it: iOS 7."
---

<img class="img-responsive center" alt="iOS 7" src="/assets/images/ios7.png">

A year ago today, Apple released the sixth version of the company's flagship 
iOS mobile operating system. Unlike the positively received iOS 5, iOS 6 was 
seen by many as a step backward from the software previously installed on 
millions of iPhones and iPads around the world.

As a result of licensing conflicts and subsequent efforts to break away from 
its competitors, Apple stripped iOS 6 of the older Youtube app, and replaced 
the trustworthy Google Maps with its own barely functional mapping software. 
The graphics on the new Maps app were impressive, but it simply could not 
compete in functionality with the heaps of geographic data mined by Google 
over the last decade. Frequent bug reports and loud user complaints led CEO 
Tim Cook to publicly apologize and suggest that dissatisfied users pursue 
other mapping options on the App Store.

Just under a year from the controversial release of iOS 6, the company that 
essentially invented the modern smartphone is back again with an operating 
system it hopes will leave the complaints of the past behind it: iOS 7.

### THE GOOD
#### Design

The most radical change introduced in iOS 7 is unquestionably the difference 
in user interface and design. The operating system features different fonts, a 
brighter color palette inspired by the 1977 Apple logo, and eschews the 
natural wood, felt, and leather look of previous apps in favor of a cleaner, 
flatter user interface. I'm a big fan of simple, uncluttered designs (which I 
attempt to showcase on this website), and I find this change to be a huge, 
noticeable improvement that pervades every aspect of iOS 7.

<img class="pull-right push-left" alt="Control Center" src="/assets/images/iphone_control_center.png">

#### Control Center

This was a long time coming. In previous operating systems, the user was 
forced to navigate the settings hierarchy just to accomplish basic tasks like 
connecting to WiFi. But no longer - as part of Apple's push to simplify the 
way we use our phones, quick access to common necessities such as internet, 
Bluetooth, brightness and music controls, the camera, and even a new built-in 
flashlight are just a swipe away. Control Center can be disabled while using 
apps if it gets in your way, but I anticipate very few will do so considering 
the feature's utility.

#### Multitasking

Multitasking on the iPhone is simpler than ever in iOS 7. All it takes is a 
double-tap of the Home button to preview and switch between the apps you have 
running, and a single swipe to terminate the ones you are no longer using.

#### Photos

The photo application bundled with iOS 7 now uses EXIF data recorded in each 
picture to sort by date and location, making it easy to search for a specific 
shot or event.

#### Airdrop

I have yet to use this feature, but if it's anything like the desktop version 
I'm excited to give it a go. Like the service bundled with Mac OS X Lion, the 
iOS 7 Airdrop allows users to quickly share files over WiFi or Bluetooth 
without the need to carry around an external drive or sync to a shared file 
storage service.

### THE BAD

<img class="pull-left push-right" alt="Apple's 1977 Logo" src="/assets/images/apple_1977.png" width="100">

#### The Color Palette

Although the new color palette is bright and cheerful, it does not blend very 
well with more traditional colors. Many of the bundled wallpapers contrast so 
badly with the overall color scheme that the home screen text becomes 
basically unreadable. Colors are inconsistently applied across the built-in 
apps. While the intention seems to have been to liven up the now simpler user 
interface, the color scheme often achieves the opposite effect in making text 
even more difficult to distinguish.

#### Animations

App icons fly to their postions when unlocking the phone. Folders zoom in to 
fill the screen when tapped. Dynamic wallpapers respond to the gyroscope and 
orientation of the phone and bubbles float in the background. All of these 
contribute to the exciting, playful feel that characterizes iOS 7. But 
animations also take time, and I found the gimmicks grew old after their 
initial shock value. Every second I have to wait to open an app because my 
phone is busy whizzing up to a folder is a second I could have already spent 
in the app. The animations look good, but in my opinion a bit over-done.

#### Notification Center

The notification center accessed by swiping down from the top of the screen 
has undergone few design changes from iOS 6, but these differences make it 
slightly harder to use. The text is larger and more spaced out, meaning that 
you have to scroll down in order to view all the information displayed. 
Notification Center is still a handy method of collecting relevant information 
from multiple apps, but is not as effective at serving at-a-glance updates as 
it could be.

### THE UGLY

Asthetically speaking, well, not much. What makes iOS 7 ugly as an update to 
me is not so much the small problems that will inevitably be worked out in 
future patches, but rather the disappointing degree to which it fails to 
innovate, to present something new. Under a bright new color palette and 
stylish interface the core operating system remains the same.

<p class="has-pullquote" data-pullquote="What makes iOS 7 ugly is the degree to which it fails to innovate, to present something new.">
Apple has elected to stick to its recent trend of short-term, visual stunners 
instead of the product revolution it used to be known for. The company appears 
to be struggling to keep its existing user-base satisfied in an emerging world 
of cheaper, more feature-rich options. And this trend doesn't just apply to 
the iOS line, if the new iPhone models and the Mac OS X Mavericks preview are 
any indication.</p>

As usual, Apple has introduced a simple, extraordinary product that 
accomplishes the tasks people need it to in an elegant, straightforward 
manner. But applying a new coat of paint and polish will distract from lack of 
direction for only so long - then the real questions start.