---
title: Reporting for Duty
subtitle: why traditional media neglects breaking news
date: 2013-09-03 13:14
layout: post
category: miscellaneous
tags: op-eds
excerpt: "Media crews scrambled to the scene within minutes of the twin Boston 
Marathon bombings that killed three, injured hundreds, and terrified millions. 
In response to a dramatic increase in channel viewership, most major news 
networks replayed endless video footage of the horrific attacks and promised 
real-time coverage as the search for the perpetrators continued."
---

<p class="lead">I wrote this op-ed for my freshman writing seminar right after 
the arrest of the Boston Marathon bomber. It was topical then, but I believe 
the need to balance the use of social media and investigative journalism is 
just as relevant today.</p>

Media crews scrambled to the scene within minutes of the twin Boston Marathon 
bombings that killed three, injured hundreds, and terrified millions. In 
response to a dramatic increase in channel viewership, most major news 
networks replayed endless video footage of the horrific attacks and promised 
real-time coverage as the search for the perpetrators continued.

**Only days later, an MIT public safety officer was shot as he idled in his 
car.**

It was not too long before reporters swarmed the campus to interview students, 
and then even each other, in one of the most widely covered stories of the 
year. *Why was the officer shot?* Were the ones responsible connected in any 
way to the bombings? Lack of information hardly stopped correspondents from 
giving their take. After all, the public demanded constant updates, not 
substance. Journalists felt no reason to wait to publish until more was known.

<p class="has-pullquote" data-pullquote="I sat glued to my computer screen, 
listening to breaking news of a major national story that the mainstream media 
refused to cover.">Or so it seemed, until an explosive car chase and 
unprecedented manhunt led by thousands of officers from the Boston Police 
Department, FBI, and SWAT unfolded throughout the night following the MIT 
shooting with little if any coverage from traditional media sources. 
Developments in the rapidly changing situation appeared to be available solely 
through social media sites such as Twitter, where users in the chase’s 
vicinity - or with access to the police scanner over which the officers 
communicated - continually posted updates on the ongoing hunt.</p>

So I, along with 80 thousand other listeners around the world, sat glued to my 
computer screen listening to breaking news of a major national story that the 
mainstream media refused to cover.

There are certainly advantages to hearing and reading about news as it occurs 
instead of waiting for established media sources to report. The constantly 
updating feed of information surrounding the manhunt provided swift access to 
facts only a keystroke away. Thousands of people listening to the Boston 
police scanner posted almost every word they picked up, allowing those reading 
from their phones or unable to find the broadcast to quickly digest what was 
happening, without encountering that extra dose of opinion that frequently 
creeps, often unintentionally, from the editorial page to the main story.

And yet, despite the inundation of facts, tips, and leads pouring in over the 
police scanner and realm of social media, many traditional news sources stuck, 
almost stubbornly, to their established reporting procedure. Well researched 
stories were posted on their websites discussing the car chase and subsequent 
manhunt, but only released hours after the same facts appeared on Twitter.
 
<p class="has-pullquote pullquote-left" data-pullquote="Facebook users 
messaged Sunil’s mother, asking her how it felt to have raised a killer.">
Users of the social media aggregate website Reddit likened a picture of 
missing Brown University undergraduate Sunil Tripathi to an image that the 
Boston Police Department circulated of one of the bombing suspects in a 
thread that received hundreds of supporting “upvotes.” When the police scanner 
began naming possible suspects to be further investigated, one Twitter user 
reported hearing Tripathi mentioned and before long the web was buzzing with 
the news.</p>

Facebook users messaged Sunil’s mother, asking her how it felt to have raised 
a killer. Mainstream news outlets remained silent while Reddit, Twitter, and 
other popular social media sites exuberantly declared the death of traditional 
media and the triumph of crowdsourcing over investigative journalism.

#### Then the *actual* Boston Marathon bombers were apprehended. ####

Sunil Tripathi’s lifeless body was pulled out of the Providence River days 
later, his death unrelated to the events in Boston. The accusing thread’s 
original author deleted his account, and Reddit promptly issued a formal 
apology to the former Brown student’s family that could not remove the added 
pain and suffering they had already endured.

Recorded streams of the scanner proved that Tripathi’s name was never actually 
mentioned by police, but rather spread virally by one or two social media 
contributors.

Traditional media was vindicated in its caution about reporting unprocessed 
information on the unprecedented Boston manhunt before it received at least 
some analysis. Recognizing that the police scanner does not just report facts, 
but also tips and leads that the department receives, news sources decided to 
protect their reputations - and acted with greater responsibility - by 
assuming a “research over rush” strategy and only covering elements of the 
story that were readily verifiable. Although these sources may have lost 
readers and viewers that they could otherwise have attracted during the 
manhunt and resulting rush for information, the backlash ensuing from false 
leads reported by social media justified their decision to wait.

One day, social media sources will find a way to cover breaking news and 
rapidly changing situations in a responsible manner without supporting the 
viral spread of misinformation and damaging accusations.

Until then, I’m willing to wait a few extra hours to read reports that I can 
trust.